
Section III - LIFE

Chapter 1 - Family

“Parents, do not irritate your

children or they will lose heart.” -- Colossians 3:21

·

Ones

close friends and family are part of one's soul. To cut them off is to put

oneself at risk of cutting off a vital organ. Children leaving their parents

home at the age of 18 are in general making a mistake, for the soul isn't ripe

then and should still be attached to the tree. Every family is a tree. One

can't cut himself off from any part of it without dire danger to himself. This

refers to spiritual families where there is love, not to merely physical

families.

Families

are the 10 sephirot:

God, Father,

Mother and the children. The true friends are the

makifim

(outer light).

Enemies are the klipot caused by the breaking of the vessels, if they have some

reason for their hatred. If not, they are from the empty space from which God

removed his Presence in order to create the world.

·

Eighteen

is a very bad age to leave the home for the light from one's father which is

the outer light doesn't come strongly until the age of twenty and it’s that

outer light which is the strongest protection. Eighteen-year-olds don't realize

they are considered a resource. So many institutions do everything possible to

take them away from their parents physically and spiritually, which cuts them

off from their roots and kills them (spiritually and sometimes physically), and

sometimes that kills the parents also.

·

In

general, if the two parents are living together for the reason of love, then

the children should not leave the home to live in a different state. For two

people living together from love have more to teach their children than all the

schools put together.

·

The root

of not getting along with parents starts from the brothers and sisters. One

must get along with his brothers and sisters with absolute self-sacrifice.

Siblings aren't people who would automatically be friends. Usually they are

completely different, but they have a common root. Therefore, they must try to

go beneath surface appearance to that common root.

·

For major

decisions in ones life, one should have a meeting of his close family and

friends to discuss it. (This idea is from George Fox.) I don't believe in

asking rabbis or clergy for advice for they will always give advice in such a

way that will get you sucked into their particular version of their particular

religion. Look, it’s their way of making a living - can you blame them? But if

you don't want to make a mess of your life, take count of all the people who

love you sincerely or who have stuck themselves out on a limb for you, (i.e.,

family and real friends), find the majority opinion on any major issue

affecting your life and stick with it. The idea applies only if they do love

you and not just a relationship of convenience.

·

Nowadays

there is no pact [contract] between parents and children to stick together. But

there should be. Just because society has forgotten what it means to have

families stick together doesn't mean you have to. The commitment to stick

together provides a

makif

(an outer protective light) that can ward off

the

klipot

, just like marriage. (The commitment in a society to stick

together also provides its unique type of

makif

(surrounding protective

light) and that is the spiritual source of political systems.) Monarchy,

democracy, theocracy, communism, socialism, republicanism, which are from the 6

sephirot, Kindness, Power, Beauty, Eternity, Splendor, and Royalty.

·

The idea

of family is to stay with each other through the ups and downs (i.e., since in

every family there are going to be periods that each individual member goes

nuts, that is the time every other member has to stick with them. As the Sages

said, “accept and exist” -- i.e., accept what comes at you, lower your head and

let the wave pass over, and then you will be able to stand).

·

Commitment

to sticking together as a family is an ideal which seems at first glance to

cancel out all other ideals since there is always lot of inertia to prevent one

from the direction, he thinks he must take; however, I think that the

temptation to separate is in general a test of the evil side, and only if one

stays firm, does he really come to that which he must (without breaking up the

family). [It's always good to have lots of inertia. Some things need to be done

but it's always good to sit on every major change for a long time. When I was

in Kiev and my black friend John Jackson was with me, I remember some incident

that I wanted to call the police about and he said no, wait. And we waited and

it turned out ok in fact. I've never had an experience with the police anytime

that they didn't make things worse.]

For Parents

·

Rabbi

Nachman said, “He who doesn't have compassion on his children has no portion in

the intelligence of holiness.” Somehow it strikes me that Einstein gave up his

family to advance his career and it's that which did him no good. He had

already developed the principles of the general theory of gravitation, and

never after that developed another viable theory. And he went to Germany to

accept a fancy position there, and eventually they were about to expel him, so

the day before that he resigned. Now who are we to judge? Yet it is a bit odd.

Maybe he would have made more progress if he had stuck with his wife and kids.

·

Give your

children a relationship, especially when they are teenagers. If you don't get

along with them at that age, be rest assured, they will find someone else to

get along with and fall into some stupid cult which will be their parent

figure. Don't ignore religion and philosophy so your children who will search

will be able to talk with you about it.

·

Your

children are your life. You receive flow only to the degree you give flow. In

Akudim, Zeir and Nukbah are greater than Abba and Imma, so as we progress

towards the final correction many times the children are better than the

parents.

·

There is

no such thing as children. Children are just adults that look small, and adults

are children who look big.

·

The only

way to rebuke your children is if it hurts you more than it hurts them to do

so. Children don't respond to words or deeds but to feelings. Feelings are all

that matter in human relationships, therefore there are no rules. If a parent

who has no love raises children according to all the rules, the result will not

be good. If a parent with love raises his/her children even if he breaks all

the rules, the result will be good. Giving a child in to the hands of a parent

or guardian who doesn't love the child - is murder.

·

The force

that holds the children around the parents as the Coulomb attraction

[IMAGE: image009.gif]

.

For more

children, the parents need to include more power from the name 45 and 52, i.e.,

to include more male and female flow. For seven children, the family gains the

character of Nitrogen in connection with one more. A Seven child family is

inert like N2, but must avoid any connection with nitroglycerine-people, so

that it doesn't form bonds resulting in TNT.

·

Parents -

spend time teaching your children your philosophy or they will get the world-views

from elsewhere, i.e., spending time with them to teach math or just to talk

isn't the same thing.

Teenagers

have to be bad. So let them be bad in something not so bad.

When your

teen comes home from school and wants to talk, never turn him down even if it

is daily for hours. If he can't talk to you, he will find someone else to talk

to that won't necessarily be to your liking.

Children

need your respect more than your love. The key to raising children is to assume

as a given [an axiom] that if they say something that it means something. Don't

think because you are some big shot parents that their feelings are

meaningless. If you do you will eventually find yourself to be meaningless in

their lives.

·

One

application of Game Theory in raising children is don't try to impose total

authority. Assume as a political leader you can't get total control. But there

are areas where you can have some minimal control. Maximize your minimal gains.

Don't try to get everything. Try to get the greatest number of

small

gains. (Especially in a free society where children are well aware of what kind

of world they live in and will not respond to a dictatorial parent. This is

probably the case in general no matter what kind of environment it is, but in a

free society the reaction is more pronounced.

·

Parents

are only parents to the older boy and girl. The older children are the

spiritual parents of the younger children.

·

It’s not

good to be authoritarian, only authoritative. The reason is that the evil

inclination is divided among the nations of the world and every nation has a

different evil inclination [as per the

Likutai Moharan

]. The evil

inclination has to get divided up in every house in a similar way, and only a

certain kind of leader can subdue it.

·

Don't bug

your children. Respect your children. They are the same people they will be

when they are adults.

·

If you

are angry with your children, this is a sure sign that judgements are dwelling

on you. Assume you are wrong.

·

Rabbi

Nachman gave said some advice which I think is particularly appropriate for

raising children. One of his major principles was, “Not to be stubborn about anything

in the world”, which in Hebrew has a little different connotation than in

English. It means not to force any issue with children. Also, he said not to

slug them. Which in modern day Breslov is interpreted to mean not to hit them

at all but I can't imagine that Rabbi Nachman really meant that. However, it

probably is a good idea to not hit at all.

·

For Children

·

For

children let me warn you the worst thing you could ever do to yourselves is to

cause your parents pain (emotionally). It's worth it to give up a lot to keep

your parents happy - even bad parents. I understand there can be exceptions,

but this is a general rule.

·

One who

stands alone without his family will probably fall into some trap the religious

and political fanatics of the world like to set for people. This is an

important principle in life. (Sometimes a parent can be lacking all parental

feelings, and thus be unfit to advise his children, but in the natural scheme,

one's best friend will always be one's parents.)

·

The Sages

say that one should hold on to the profession of his father. This in fact is

the case in a spiritual way, but the meaning isn't that one should do nothing

else, but that one should do something related to his father’s profession or

interests.

·

Your

parents provided you with your car and road map. The great saints like Jesus or

Rabbi Nachman wrote the road map, and their disciples printed it. But your

parents bought and paid for it. So, the saints deserve praise for the general

lighting of the road. But you owe your parents for your specific light. Rabbi

Nachman implies that the general correction is the most powerful, however both

are important.

·

A person

whose life function is analytic (like a sine or cosine) can be expanded into a

Taylor series — and therefore one should have children. And since the sine or

cosine is periodic he can be represented as a Fourier expansion <???>

(A)+

S

[(a)(sin nx) +(b)(cos nx)

f

rom zero

to infinity, where the first term is what God gives and the second is from the

mother, soul of the mother, soul of the soul of the mother etc., and the last

term is from the father, soul of the father, etc. (The reason people’s lives are,

in general, sine or cosine functions, is that the life-force drawn into the

empty space is an oscillating AC current.

Chapter 2 - Marriage

“A hasty attachment is held to be dishonorable, because time is

the true test of this as of most other things”

-Plato, the Symposium

My bounty is as boundless as the sea,

My love as deep; the more I give to thee,

The more I have, for both are infinite.

-Juliet

to Romeo

·

I believe in marriage

at young ages — in the teenage years as the Talmud says,

and as

was always done by the disciples of the Baal Shem Tov and the Moroccan Jews,

and Yemenite Jews. The

sepherah

of Foundation is the teenage years and

therefore the most appropriate time for procreation, as the Talmud says that

Rabbah said, “The reason I am better than my friends is because I married at

16, and if I would have married at 14, I would have said ‘an arrow in the eye

of the evil inclination’”, i.e. he wouldn't have been afraid of the evil

inclination at all. Also, two wives are permitted even to Ashkenazic Jewry —

because the decree of Rabbi Gershon was only for a limited time as it says in

the

Shulchan Aruch.

·

One can

combine the circular and the straight

sephirot

into one, which results

in the name 63 (since

yosher

and

igulim

are from 52 and 45) by

considering the combination of a point in the

igulim

and of a point in

yosher as one point in the new type of sephirot of 63 and 72 (as a product

manifold) I think this is the spiritual process that we are involved with now

for in the redemption there will be the name 72 so we must be in one stage

before that. This would explain why so many Jews are marrying non-Jews; in

order to combine the vessels of tikun with the light if tohu (if the non-Jew

goes into a

mikvah

for the sake of becoming a Jew this is permitted to

Rashi and Tospot but not the Rambam who requires three judges.

·

Many

times, one suffers because of one's mate. He should know that the suffering

would come upon him anyway even without the mate and therefore getting rid of

them won't help. It will only make things worse. But in a harsher form.

·

A Word to Women

A.

All men are either eccentric or evil. So, if

you notice your husband is bit different, be pleased you didn't get the other

type. This is because truth nowadays is afraid to show its face, so it hides

itself in weird personality traits. Evil isn't afraid of anything, so they seem

absolutely normal.

B.

Men usually cease to be men after they are

married and become “husbands”, so don't be surprised when it happens. As you

know, you put out a special effort to be nice during the dating dance, so does

he. Men, by nature, put out a tremendous amount of energy in the wooing

process, but after they are married that energy just doesn't exist. And a man

will always fall back on whatever he was in the first place with all the same

quirks and weaknesses that he strove to hide while he was wooing you… This is

not an act of deception any more than the mating dance of the bees. It's just a

part of nature.

·

But there

may be many right ones like Rachel and Leah where Leah wasn't really meant for

Yaakov, but still it worked out well because there was still a true connection.

But his real mate was Rachel. [Since true mate is a matter of percentage, one

person might be 20% a true-mate and another 50%. As Rabbi Nachman explains,

every person may have many people that are connected with him in this way.]

Though the Rambam apparently disagrees with the idea of a true mate, this idea

of percentages explains it.]

·

The

problem of not finding one's proper mate is the modern-day plague on the entire

world. Just like 55 years ago World War II was the plague of the world for no

known reason except an inexplicable judgement that came into the world, so

today judgement of never finding one’s proper mate has come into the world.

(This is how today people are punished for their sins from previous lives.) The

more sex is idolized the more the newspapers around the world are filled with

“personals” of women who can't find any men and men who can't find any woman.

The exception is only the very wicked who God rewards their few good deeds with

sexual pleasure in this world in order that they should have no reward in the

next. The other exception is the very righteous who sanctify themselves at the

time of sex in which case the sexual act becomes a part of their Divine

worship.

·

Men's

problem is with lust; women's, with anger; legalize a man's right to be married

to two wives and you solve both problems. Dividing responsibilities between two

women whether there sexual or maintaining a household would be easier. The man

won't be on their nerves the whole time asking for sex or needing to be waited

on after a hard day at work. While one woman is a

nidah

the other would

be available for sex. Why be stricter than the Bible? As the Sages of the

Talmud say, “There aren't enough things God has forbidden, that we have to find

more? If only we would just keep what is already there.”

·

“All is

confounded by all-mastering time; faith dies, distrust is born; and the same

spirit is never steadfast among friends; for be it soon or late, men find sweet

turn to bitter, and then once more to love.” - Sophocles.

So -

families should stick together through the ups and downs; they will come out in

the end on top. When entering into a marriage one must be totally committed to

making it work no matter what. But that isn't enough. You have to be aware of

how committed your partner is to you. If it isn't the same degree, then all

your commitment won't help. And if they are committed to things about you, but

not to you, it also won't work. The only thing that can make a marriage work is

that both parties have this commitment and the emotional ability to stick with

a commitment.

·

Those

that are devout are attached to the divine trait of Ru

lership,

and

therefore there is a flow of children to them as Rabbi Nachman explains in the

Lekutai Morahan. That is the meaning of the statement of the Sages that the

redemption won't come until all the souls in “spiritual storehouse of souls”

will be born, which according to Rabbi Issaac Luria refers to the

Tree of

Knowledge of Good and Evil

which is the Divine trait of Ru

lership (

this

is the reason Rabbi Eliyahu from Vilna said that allowing two wives would

hasten the redemption).

·

“Love is the most

powerful force in the world.” -- James Cameron

Human

emotions are the most powerful forces bending and breaking and building

societies, philosophies, ideas, creating and destroying worlds, spiritual and

physical. But of all the emotions, love is the most powerful, the highest of

the seven lower sephirot (forces), but lower than the three higher ones

(fields).

·

At the

time of the revival of the dead they and all those who are supposed to be

together will be together - but that can only be accomplished by the readiness

to give up one's life for each other in this world. But

understanding

is

also on the level of self-sacrifice which shine upon those that love each

other; and that merit isn't just for them but for the correction of the whole

world - to create a better world at the time of the revival of the dead so that

all loved ones will be able to be together forever in God's light in the

physical and spiritual world which will all be one at that time, in the world

that will be above time and space.

·

A deeper

way to understand marriage would be to apply it to the two sephirot of Beauty

and Royalty. But the Divine Presence has fallen into the klipot, so many women

end up marrying some

klipah

and bringing more klipot into the world

unless she can free herself from the evil side. This is the reason it is

imbedded in the nature of women to be attracted to money and power.

·

Marriage

in America is particularly unstable. One out of two or three (depending on the

area) break down. The Jewish orthodox community which came from Europe took a generation

to get “Americanized”, and now their ratio is quickly reaching the same level.

Curiously though, in Christian communities where the family attends church

regularly the ratio is 1 out of 40. In families where not only do they attend

church, but also have daily devotional life and family prayer the ratio is 1

out of 400. These are staggering statistics. While I'm at this I will mention

the other curious fact that the healthiest state in the USA is Utah. Now you

might want to say that it is because it is in a desert region; but Colorado is

the unhealthiest (and it is also in a desert region). The difference would seem

to be the difference between the Mormons and Las Vegas. These statistics

conform with the idea of Jesus being the Messiah of Joseph [foundation of

Emanation the source of peace], for it is a principle of the Torah that by

following a saint one is blessed.

·

There are

as many types of marriage as there are types of human beings. However, the

basic types are:

1.

The spiritual marriage:

This

marriage is the revelation of an already existing bond. This one can weather

all obstacles, since its essence is eternal. But it requires that both mates be

homo-spiritualis — spiritual beings.

2.

The fun marriage:

This is

the marriage of the scientist philosopher whose motivating principle is

curiosity and creativity.

3.

The reasonable marriage:

Not bad

if based on feeling also, but reason is a very poor basis for human

relationships.

4.

The community sponsored marriage, or the

practical. i.e., those that wouldn't be together except for the honor one or

the other has from the community and the community support. These are put

together and kept together by the community. There is nothing holy about this.

It is purely biological. Marriage of the Jewish orthodox are of this type. [In

each of these four types, for the marriage to be stable they both have to be of

the same type of person. But as you can see a stable marriage doesn't mean there

is anything good about either person.]

·

There is

such a thing as finding the right person and knowing that it is so. But if the

love isn't like that of Jack and Rose (from the movie

Titanic

) where

each was willing to give up their lives for the other then I would say live

together for a year before you get married to see if you'll remain in love. [It

is worth it to mention that Jack's willingness to jump in after Rose was due to

his kind character, for he didn't know Rose at the time. The lesson is that a

kind person will be kind to everyone regardless of who it is.

·

All women

come in pairs. That is one reason why to allow two wives. Every man either has

no choice who to marry or two choices. Both are on the level of a true match.

Just one makes more sense but there is no love, just like the other makes no

sense but there is love. (Most marriages are the ones that make sense but there

is no love.

·

The

genius of the species wants improvement of the species so promiscuous sex is

not good because it is aimed at quantity, not quality. Marriage is possibly

good since the mates check out each other beforehand to see if they are

compatible which is in fact irrelevant but what does matter is that they convey

the information true the genius of the species which knows if the female male

aspects complement each other. If so, they get sexually aroused. None of this

has anything to do with compatibility or character.

The

reason for infatuation is that the genius of the species [y

echida

] sees

that the male and female aspect of these two individuals complement and

complete each other so the children may turn out better than either. However,

there is no guarantee that this will be the case since it still depends on

God's will. Promiscuous sex is evil since there is no possibility of improving

the species since there is no discretion as to whether the male and female

aspects complement each other.

Lack of

infatuation means a knowledge of the genius of the species that the children

resulting from the union will not be good. This is why the Jewish Orthodox

community deteriorates every generation. Even though there are no more arranged

marriages, but they also aren't based on love or infatuation. Therefore, one

must be very careful to marry only a person he or she is infatuated with. Even

if it only a temporary feeling it doesn't matter, for at least at the beginning

it has to be there.

Marriages

based on infatuation alone are not usually the stable ones and thus are not in

the best interest of the individuals involved, but the genius of the species is

looking for the good of the children. That is why they are attracted to each

other. Hopefully it should be possible to have marriages based on infatuation

that the more mature members of the family and friends also approve of so there

should be hope of stability also.

·

Keeping

one's area clean is important. However, there are several things to know about

cleanliness:

1)

Just because you are cleaning doesn't mean

you have to yell at everybody else to clean. If you want to be clean, very

nice, but don't make everyone miserable because of it.

2)

The reason TV was created was so that you can

clean your room while you are watching it.

3)

The reason you can't teach a teenager

cleanliness is that it has to come from inside, the teenager has to become

disgusted enough himself from living in filth to clean up. At any rate it is a

very important rule in parenting not to rule, not to take the rulership from

God. God alone is the Ruler and when one tries to rule others [or himself by

imposing arbitrary rules] one is infringing on God's rulership.

Chapter 3 - Sex

-

“For the gods are slow, though they are sure,

in visitation, when men scorn godliness and turn to frenzy.” — Oedipus At

Colonus by Sophocles

“Joy of life depends upon a certain spontaneity in regard to sex.

Where sex is repressed, only work remains, and a gospel of work for work's sake

never produced any work worth doing.” -- Bertrand Russell

·

There is

something about sex which reacts against a person when it is merely physical.

If it doesn't involve a spiritual bonding, it reacts. Sex demands to be treated

with respect and as the bonding of two souls into one. If not, it gets angry

like a jealous wife and exacts a price. Sex which is purely sensual spells the

end of the relationship.

·

There is

no such thing as free sex (even in marriage). When one doesn't sanctify himself

at that time, the price he pays is anger, i.e., he receives anger into his

soul. Sex with sanctity draws love, kindness and blessing into the world.

Sanctity in sex means the binding of the souls together and then bringing them

up to God. It has nothing to do with marriage.

·

Pleasure

is on the level of the tree of knowledge of good and evil and therefore not

good or bad in itself but dependent on what one uses it for. If one brings up

the sparks of holiness in that pleasure into holiness, he himself goes up and

the evil falls. Just saying a blessing has nothing to do with this. It depends

a lot on what one actually does with that pleasure. If it’s having children, it

depends on how he raises the children. If it's food, it depends on what one

does with the energy. Pleasure for the sake pleasure remains on the original

level and it falls into evil and becomes evil itself. Pleasure however for the

sake of God and done with attachment to God is like a sacrifice and is on a

very holy level.

·

In a time

that the matches aren't between true matches, God still draws the proper souls

by one soul in the world who is on the level of Joseph (the sephirah of

Foundation). This is

bechinas

(on the level of) what it says by Joseph

“the girls jumped over the wall” to see him as Rashi explains there and also

what it says by Rebbi Yochanan who waited outside the

mikvah

so the

women coming out from the mikvah would see him and draw the souls that came

into the world from the level of Joseph.

·

Sex when

it is an expression of Love is a

mitzvah

since all Love is of God. And

when it is for physical pleasure, it is a sin even though it is within marriage

since then it is from the

Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil

. The Sages

hint to this when they say only a disciple of a sage can eat meat since he

brings up the sparks of holiness in the meat to God. Also, they said a person

that marries the daughter of an earthly person transgresses the command “cursed

is he that lies with an animal.”

·

In a

relationship, if the female says “it's over”, IT’S OVER. since women don't want

the sex as much as the security which she obviously believes she has found in

another way... Also, they are closer to the evil side since their root is in

the lowest sephirah. Also, their

root is

related to

the sephirah of judgement which makes them prone to anger [i.e., pure evil].

Men are from the middle sephirah and thus want sex more and are less close to

the evil side for sex in itself isn't good or evil. It depends on what one

makes of it.

·

According

to the Talmud, “The man asks with his mouth and the woman in her heart,” i.e.,

the man actually has to ask for sex. This is opposed to modern ideas that the

man is supposed to beat around the bush. However, isn't asking for anything in

the category of idolatry?!

The Sages

say in another place, “one that asks for his portion is as if he stole it.” The

answer is that if when you ask you know that in truth, “there is nothing

besides Him,” and everything you see is simply the infinite light of God in

these garments before your eyes — or put simply, everything you see is God at

least as he manifests Himself to us. However, asking anything from someone that

in your mind isn't included in God [even if you know that their granting the

request is dependent on God] is idolatry. For that is actually the exact

definition of idolatry. The Torah doesn't deny that there are other gods or

higher angels appointed over the nations and over specific things like wisdom.

The Torah is full of the existence of them. But you can't serve them. [This

incidentally explains the verse there is nothing besides Him that Rabbi Nachman

said is literal. Now you could ask, couldn't it mean there are no gods besides

Him (as we find in the Torah the subject of a verb sometimes missing as Rashi

points out

often

)? The problem with that is that

there are other gods besides Him, so to speak, but they aren't

gods

but angels appointed over their specific tasks.

So, when it says there is nothing besides Him, it has to be taken literally,

that none of the things God created have any existence without Him. In a

practical vein the actual existence of matter is the condensed light of God. It

is not from the empty space but from the light that was drawn into Akudim, the

light returned up and the vessels stayed behind and thus became solidified.

Because

of the breaking of the vessels later on, the matter we see doesn't appear to

contain any of that light, as it would have — if not for the breaking of the

vessels. But in any case, the actual substance is from the light, not from the

empty space. I have thought however that in some way there is a relation to the

empty space, but it is probably not true. The real probable cause of the

solidification is the very reason why there was a creation in the first place,

i.e., the basic “lack” that was in the kindness of God before there was anyone

to do kindness to.

So, He

had to create separate beings from Himself in order to reward them with the

highest good, i.e., being one with Him. So, when you look at the world around

you it is accurate to conceive of it as the condensed light of God. To actually

receive the revelation of the light however is in the next world. This world is

only a preparation. So even the light that shines here is just to purify us for

that great light there. Meditation doesn't draw it. It merely helps one go into

oneself to discover who he is. There is no mental energy. All the metaphors in

this book are talking on higher spiritual levels, not the physical world.

The Life

force exists on one level, and the spirit on another, and the soul on another

etc... These levels are related only by the Strange Loops or some hidden

staircase from level to level. They are not accessible by any trick. God hates

tricks and He will never shine his light on anyone that thinks he can get it by

some trick, practice, or good deed, etc.

God's

light is a gift that may come once in a lifetime or stay awhile but it can

never be forced. What meditation can do is to bring one into his own vessels, and

to clean them out and polish them but it can't draw the light. If God wants to

pour in the water after you cleaned your vessel that is up to Him. Even the

mitzvot

of the Torah are to make us holy and to love and fear God, but they can't draw

God. As He said, “I will have mercy on him who I will have mercy upon.” — The

Strange Loop again.

Chapter 4 – The Ways of Life

(or Principles of Life)

“One needs no cause. Whatever is decreed to come to one, will come

without any cause at all.

-Madregas Ha Adam (Rabbi Joseph Yozel Horwitz

)

“Not he who fasts and prays is acceptable, rather he who knows

HIM.

-The Rambam in the

Guide for the Perplexed

, chapter 53.)

·

One

should have absolute trust in God to give him a living and all his needs in

spiritual and physical matters. Still, one should do something for a living

which is a part of serving God. “Great is work, for God himself has commanded

that one should do some minimal amount of work”

— Sefer HaMidot

(by

Rabbi Nachman).

God runs

the world between two poles, trust in God and self-reliance: and as with the

uncertainty principle the exact location between those two poles you belong at

any one instant isn’t determinate. This comes from the dichotomy between the

circular and straight

sephirot

. Rabbi Nachman said one should do just

enough effort to make a vessel to receive God's blessing (in a natural way) if

he so desires to give it. The idea of the natural vessel is the name

Elohim

which has the numerical value of the word for nature which reflects the

circular sephirot. In that vessel then can come the blessing from the

Inflammable Name which reflects the straight sephirot.

·

In

general, the evil inclination can be broken only by an oath to do the right

thing. This applies also to any evil habit like masturbation — however its also

good not to eat anything in the morning until 12:00 pm, in order to break that

evil inclination.

·

Many

times, advice you receive in a dream will be much more accurate than even what

good friends give. The Rambam held that the statement of the Sages that prophecy

was taken from Israel meant only until the year 1240 and that in that year

prophecy would return to Israel. He had this tradition from his father who

received it from his father and so on. The Rambam also says that all prophets

besides Moses receive their prophecy only asleep and in dreams. He even says

that if the prophet is awake, a deep sleep has to fall upon him before he can

prophesize. This would seem to indicate nowadays there is reason to at least

consider the possibility that a dream may be more than a dream. I have had

dreams telling me what to do or telling me to follow certain daily rules [e.g.,

“You have no hope except to say the midnight prayer”, or cleanliness in the

garments to the degree of changing even if there is a little perspiration; and.

“You learn Torah. Physics is a side thing”, etc...] and I have regretted not

following them.

·

In Safed

there was a fellow named Mordechai Shebabo who was a physical education teacher

in the public high school. He also happened to be an expert fencer. He was on

the Israeli Olympic team as a fencer. A few nights before he had to leave for

the Olympics in Munich, he had a dream of Rabbi Moshe Alkebetz telling him,

“Don't go to the Olympics. Come to my grave to fix it and to clean the area.”

He of course paid no attention to it, but then on the next night he had the

same dream. After the second or third night he had already decided there was

something to it. He went down the next day to the Cave of Rabbi. Moshe Alshich

and began cleaning it. In the meantime, the rest of the team went to Munich,

and were all massacred by Palestinian terrorists.

·

One

should go to the shrine of Rabbi Nachman in Uman every Rosh Hashanah, in order

to fix the trait of power during the year, for the vertical line of light of

power is located there.

·

When one

gives up hope, that's when hope begins. God doesn't step in until one gives up --

to show that it's not your prayers or efforts that count, only his Will.

·

Don't own

anything too much. (i.e., don't be attached to anything too much. Don't

consider it yours too much.) God has a way of running things which show one

that which he thinks is his, really isn't his at all.

·

In any disagreement

between the mind and the heart, one must go after the

heart.

“Trust in the Lord with all your heart and upon your understanding do not

depend.” (Mishle) i.e., don't depend on your logic, but the voice of God in the

inner heart. (But not the desires of the outer heart. This is because human

relationships are in the spiritual realm which isn't subject to logic).

·

The

Toldos Yakov Yoseph explains that the difference between the side of good and

the side of evil is that the side of evil wants to destroy the good totally,

while the side of good doesn't want to destroy the evil but to subdue it and

allow it to exist.

·

The

principle that there is nothing besides God, one always has to accept from his

arch enemy. Judaism never noticed it until they get it from Hinduism and Rabbi

Chayim of Volozhin from the Chasidim, Rav Shik (of Breslov) from Chabad. The

same time this concept came into Jewish writings -- the 1700s -- is the exact

time the European community became infatuated with the Bhagavad Gita and the

Sutras. At any rate, for what it is worth, I will mention that the kabbalah in

the

Pardes

of Rabbi Moshe Cordavaro) has the exact middle opinion

between Shankara and Ramanuga. The teaching of the Gita is exactly duplicated

by the Baal Hatanya, that the only way to realize and come to the Oneness of

God is by meditation on it.

·

Many of

life's important principles one has to accept from his arch enemy, or never get

them at all. (Love as a principle was never noticed in Jewish writings. Jewish

writings are devoid of it for about 2000 years. It's the Christians that made a

big deal about it and finally we noticed it.)

·

Some

people are on the level of action, some on the level of words and some on the

level of thought. The way of life which applies to one can't apply to the

other. But within each group there is good and bad. On each level one must find

God.

·

The

attitude of being a fighter for justice or of hating any group or feeling like

the victim of injustice or raising children to have these attitudes creates

vindictive people who are in permanent conflict with the world and fighting for

some cause.

·

Sometimes

in life one should realize he has to come to the highest point he can get to.

Carl Jung felt that in the middle age period a transformation comes. The sages

said forty is the age of understanding. Many times, there were great leaders

that ruined their legacies just by staying on a bit too long, -- and should

have just found something else to do. The Melians thought they could hold out

against the Athenians because they knew their cause was right and they knew

they were more virtuous than the Athenians. If they had given up, they would

merely have become an Athenian colony. Instead, they held on, and all the men

were put to death, and the rest of the population were enslaved. Many times, it

is just time to give up.

Yet one

characteristic of winners is their lack of ability to give up on something that

just drives them on no matter how bleak it looks. Like Rabbi Nachman said there

is no such thing as giving up. (i.e., that even when one has given up God is

still able to save him, so there is no reality to giving up.) Truman was a

failure at 33, bankrupt at 38, yet President of the USA at 60.

This

contradiction perhaps can be answered by Epictetus: “The reality of good lies

in what is in our power. Do not wish to be a judge or politician or a lawyer,

but to be free-and there is but one way to freedom- to despise what is not in

our power.” -

Epictetus

·

A key to

self-evaluation is the opinions of one's true friends and close family. They

may not see the whole picture, but when you put yours and their point of view

together you get a three-dimensional perspective rather than your own two-dimensional

or their two-dimensional point-of-view. This is a simple mathematical fact. The

truth is that even one’s enemies point of view should be taken into account,

because even if you allow for the fact that blind hatred is the reason for most

of it there still is probably some kernel of truth.

Some of

the most important lessons in life one has to learn from one's enemy. The

reason for this is that the world one lives in is really just a reflection of

one's personality and stems from himself. Therefore, all ones' friends and

family and enemies all represent different parts of one's own personality.

Therefore, there is really no solution to one's problems except a basic change

in their personality, which after the age of five is pretty rare.  However, I

believe there is hope, for one's personality is actually a reflection of a

higher element and that is one's philosophy-or world view. Change that and you

have changed your personality. Even if the change is ever so slight it will

still have an enormous effect on the events surrounding you.

·

This

applies to whole peoples also. For instance, Germany never had to give up the

idea of their being a chosen race. They in fact have tremendous talents.

(Similarly, the Jewish people don't have to give up the idea of being the

chosen people. They in fact are a God-imbued people.) The problems come from

false conclusions from the basic facts. World conquest isn't a logical

conclusion of “chosen race”, but world betterment is. Germany could have

avoided all the problems by an ever-so-slight-change in their philosophy. But

in the long run, you can never really know who you are until it is all over.

·

An

example that a slight difference in philosophy makes a vast difference in

action is the slight difference between John Locke's democracy and Russo's.

Locke made human rights supreme and government secondary, and that led to a

democratic England and USA (until America became a socialist republic under the

New Deal).

Russo

made the general will supreme and his book has been used as a blueprint for

tyrannies and reigns of terror since then. Even though he emphasizes the

importance of the individual, like Locke, he believes the public can decide

what rights the individual can have. (It's interesting to note that Locke's

idea of inalienable rights has nothing to do with believing that people are

good, because he actually says that people are born as blank slates). Locke

derives this from the Bible. This is far from the relative humanism of the

Sophists. Rather this is a belief in absolute right and wrong and in human life

has an absolute value on the scale of values that is inalienable. Life is from

the sephirah of Wisdom, and right and wrong on the level of the lower sephirot,

so life has a value above right and wrong. [But you may ask what about the

penalties of the Torah? Those relate to values that the Torah places above

life.]

·

In

general, everything that happens with a person is an expression of their

personality. If one sees failure, he must know that it's only from his

personality and its correction is only by correcting his personality. The only

way one's future will be happier than the present is if one's future contains a

radical change in one's personality. Some search for a happiness outside of

themselves which doesn't exist. It can only exist inside oneself, if it is

created there. The door to a better future is the heart — if you can open the

door. Thus, we come to the advice of Rabbi Nachman of talking with God in a

private place. This is a key, but it doesn't open the lock unless you make it

do so. This can be misused and is no guarantee but can help and is a powerful

help.

·

I believe

Rabbi Israel Salanter must have been trying to figure out how to change one's

personality when it is a negative type. The best he could come up with was to

learn Musar, (the ethical works of Torah.) But he must have been aware that

many personality types will rise to unbelievable heights in the name of

religion, Chabad, musar, Torah, etc. and will perform awesome deeds of

righteousness for the benefit of all mankind but also inflict savagery and

untold suffering upon millions of people (particularly non-believers).

·

I believe

the true cure for a negative personality lies in the idea of John Fox that a person's

major decisions in life should be dependent on the vote of his/her family and

real friends as a group coming together to weigh all the aspects together. This

has the power of preventing a person from making serious mistakes. (“The

victory is yours when you yield to your friend” --

Sophocles

.) And if

they are a true friend and family, they won't prevent him from his positive

dreams. Also tempering revelation with reason and rationality has a strong

effect of preventing fanaticism and the guilty Puritan complex.

·

According

to

The Duties of The Heart

the entire Torah is based on the idea of

gratitude. It's important never to forget the kindness someone has done for you

no matter what happened before or after. However according to the Rambam in the

commentary on the Mishna the whole Torah is based on faith. This idea of Torah

has deeply affected Judaism until today. He says that no matter what one does

he will get to the Garden of Eden [i.e., the Jewish Garden of Eden, not

Christian one depends on belief in Jesus] if he believes in the 13-principles.

And if he doesn't believe in them, it doesn't matter what he does, he will

never get to the Garden of Eden. However, in the Talmud we find everything

depends on one's deeds. You get exactly what you give. This would seem to

contradict Rambam. If we would have only the Rambam we would say that deeds

matter only if there is already faith. However, we find The Alter from Slobadka

and the Baal Shem Tov held that deeds and faith are closely interlinked. The

Alter says that evil deeds show that the faith itself is flawed and is only

outward, while the Baal Shem Tov holds that evil deeds bring to an inner lack

of faith. According to this people that are good have inner faith deep inside

their heart even if they aren't aware of it. People that are bad may express

faith outwardly but really don't have it. Perhaps this is the opinion of the

Rambam himself for in the laws of repentance he says the Garden of Eden depends

on good deeds and wisdom.

·

The

bubble one makes for himself to isolate himself from the world will revolt and

rebel against him. This applies to individuals that think they can hide in

yeshiva, and to whole communities as well. The reason is the world is governed

by the laws of chaos and strife, so if one shuts the world out the chaos has to

overtake his particular bubble inside, and then it's worse since it is confined

to a smaller radius. You can't fight entropy forever.

·

One's

happiness depends on being oneself, not on getting things (or someone) he

thinks he needs. If one is himself, he will automatically get the things he

really needs. The reason is that the higher light doesn't flow through

constricted vessels.

·

When you

take a seat on a train or bus and then change it you will find the second many

times to be worse than the first. Many times, there is a hidden hand which

guides us, though we are unaware of it.

·

Many

times, one doesn't find what he is looking for or understand what he is

learning until he gives up looking or trying to understand. This is because the

thought or the essence of what we are looking for, has gone into the

surrounding circular light. When you let go then you are guided back to the

right place, or the right thought is guided back to you. That's why Einstein

discovered Relativity only by sleeping on it, and most great scientific

discovers are the same (this is to say that of course you can't find what you

want or understand what you want unless God wills it to come to you at that

time but the reason he uses this round about method of accident is because the

idea has to come from the surrounding light into you.) Thus, we find Issaac

Newton was prompted by the falling apple, Mendeleev was revealed the periodic

table in his dream. I've heard that Churchill got his best ideas during World

War II, while relaxing in the bathtub. In fact, penicillin; the thin layer of

the galaxy, and so many more discoveries are by accident. Feynmann was prompted

by a student flipping a plate in the dining room. Even the theory of chaos came

in such a way).

·

I used to

be annoyed when there was a fly in my room until I noticed that Analytic

Geometry started by Descartes watching a fly in his room. It occurred to him

that you could describe its position by three coordinates. What would have

happened if he had gotten up to chase it out? At any rate I figure if a fly

could start Analytic Geometry, then flies can't be

that bad --

remember

the event with King David and the spider?!

·

When I

have to run to something usually it turns out that I never should have gone or

that there was no need to run. As the Sages say, “He who presses the hour, the

hour presses him. He who is pushed away by the hour, the hour stands for him.

Rabbi Israel of Kaznitz said, “when one has a sudden urge to do a good deed,

it's a bad sign”. Rabbi Nachman said not to be stubborn. Anything that is a

true mitzvah must be worked on for a long time in order to do it. However, when

the time for a mitzvah comes one should do it right away and not delay in order

to do it better later (as the Mishna Brurah says).

·

Direct

your energies towards a single goal - the goal your heart says is right, (not

your mind or logic.) Don't aim for two targets for then you won't hit either.

Concentrate all your fire on one target. One's spiritual energy usually isn't

limitless, so you do have to deal with the fact that any goal to be achieved

well is going to need your entire attention.

·

The

problem with hatred is that one becomes that which he hates, because the side

of holiness doesn't hate anything in the way of wanting it destroyed, rather

corrected and saved. The way of being saved from ones enemies is to judge them

on the scale of merit. And pray for their good, spiritual and physical, in this

world and the next, then your prayer will reflect off them like a mirror right

back to you. And it may help them also.

·

Archenemies

are always almost completely identical (in ideas and in conduct). One side may

in fact be right and the other wrong, but it is still striking how similar they

are, e.g., the right-wing Israelis and the Palestinians, the hippies and the

establishment. As the old saying goes, “extremes meet.”

·

One should

say the thirteen principles of faith of the Rambam immediately when he wakes up

in the morning.

·

One

lacking money should say the chapter that deals with the

manna

in the

desert. There is a tradition brought in Rabbenu Bachayee that one who says it

every day will never lack a livelihood.

·

One

should pray with the intentions of the Rabbi Issac Luria in the

Siddur

HaRashash

,

except from Passover until

Shavuot

when the

Rashash

said not to

do the intentions because that period is for the building of the sephirot. I

always had a question on this because there is a distinction between the

sephirot of the day and of the year, but apparently the

Rashash

held the

if the

sephirot

of the year aren't built then you can't build the form

of each day which are dependent on it. [This would mean also during the days

from

Rosh Hashanah

until

Succot.

But I think that is going too

far and one should pray with the intentions then and depend on the opinion of

the Ramchal in his book on the intentions where he mentions that distinction

and I think it is clear that he felt one should pray with the intentions all

the time.]

·

One

should put all the intentions into one, i.e., unite all the divine names into

one point.

·

For one's

children he should say the part in Genesis which deals with creation every day

of the week. -

Sefer Hamidos.

[at least for forty days

straight for forty days is a whole time slot.]

To get married one should

say the Parsha of the sacrifices of the princes [Numbers], and the Song on the

Red Sea [Exodus].

·

The

morning prayer draws wisdom, the afternoon draws understanding and financial

security, and the evening prayer brings knowledge and blessing to one's

children. They are parallel to the 3 Patriarchs. The midnight prayer is

parallel to Leah and Rachel the Matriarchs.

·

The most

important principle in life is not to cause suffering to another person. If one

does, it will always come back to one. [As the Sages said, the measure one

measures out, is measured to him again. The Hindus assume this to be by

reincarnation but in fact there are many ways this can be done. Reincarnation

is only one of them].

·

It is a

good idea to have water near the bed to wash ones hands in the morning instead

of walking to the sink, because Reb Zushai said it is a

segula

to do so,

and the

Zohar

is strict about it.

·

Astrology

is forbidden to the Rambam but permitted to most other authorities like

Tosphot

and the

Ramban

.

·

“

Truth

is the most powerful thing in the world. It can pierce through great mountains”

— Rabbi Eliezer Shik.

·

It is an

absolutely essential part of any home to have at least one guest. There are

homeless people in every place. There are always people who need a helping

hand. Letting someone sleep on the couch is important for every home. Yet one

should never overdo his kindness in such a way that makes it hard to keep it

up. Don't be too kind, just a little kind. We see in the Torah that Abraham was

kind to the angels, but Lot went out of his way to beg them to come in and made

a very big deal about it. In such a way one gets worn out quickly. It is better

to do it with

tzimtzum

[control-and limit.]

·

In the

hierarchy of spaces there is a space called emotional space where the

components are emotions. [There is also one called Idea Space where ideas

interact.]

[IMAGE: image010.gif]

I

j

=k;

j

k

=i;

k

i

=j.

Love

multiplied by truth = victory.

Love of

love of Judgement

Love of

Truth love of eternity doing kindness.

The sephirot

emotions of the evil side are love of cruelty, love of sex as a physical act,

love of lying, or not learning wisdom etc.

·

T

wo things

one must be careful to avoid: fame and illicit sex [i.e., sex outside of

marriage].

The

reason is not that either of these things are evil, but because they are

dangerous. Sex and honor are incredibly powerful sources of energy and just

like atomic energy, if not handled with extreme caution they can be deadly. Now

sex even in marriage is by no means necessarily holy but certainly less

dangerous since there is at least the surrounding light of the marriage

commitment.

Now the

story that Rabbi Adam Baal Shem told the Baal Shem Tov about his previous

gilgul

shows that one must be careful not to reveal any good deeds one has done or

anything one has learned. It seems clear from the Lekutai Moharan that the

reason for this is that saying the good deed gives the

kelipot

an

ability to attach themselves to it.

·

Rabbenu Yona explains that

making a Rav [teacher] for oneself means even a friend. The Yerushalmi [brought

by the Rambam and Rabbenu Yona] says even any old man from the street. [The

incident where there was a rabbi wanted to decide a halacha, so he said, “Bring

in an old man from the street.”]

·

There are

two kinds of honor: one Divine honor and the other honor of men. Honor is a

surrounding light from the sepherah of M

alchut

(or understanding).

Sometimes a person has neither type, and in his case any fame or publicity he

gets will be just the evil eye and be very damaging for him. Other people do

have one or the other type of honor and in their case the fame or publicity doesn't

hurt them. However, in the case of the Divine honor, if one has it shining on

himself, but he is a sinner then he will be infamous and despised. These

purifies him so that he can continue to receive that Divine light.

Chapter 5 - Friendship

“Men of

notorious depravity or obvious deceit yield nothing in nastiness to

hypocritical pseudo-philosophers and treacherous friends.” —Tacitus,

The

Annals of Imperial Rome

·

People

you think are your friends never are, and those who you think aren't usually. A

true friend is someone who will help you when you are down and out, and that's

impossible to know until it happens.

·

In a

far-off Arabic land, a long time ago there was a Jew who had a son who was

neglecting the daily prayers and spending every evening at a different friend’s

house partying. The father asked his son, “How many friend do you have?” “About

50 or 60”, he answered. The father said, “that is amazing for I am an old man

and after so many years all I have is one friend and one half-friend. How is it

possible that you have fifty or sixty already and you are just a young man?”.

“Let's try a test. I'll spread some ketchup on you and give you a long knife

and go to each of your friend house saying you were attacked, and you fought

off your attacker and grabbed the knife from him and killed him and now you

need to be hidden from the police.”

In the

early evening he went to the first house, the friend opened the door, he told

his story and the “friend” yelled “Get out of here, demon” and slammed the door

on his face. The second house barely opened the door and immediately slammed it

shut after seeing him. And thus, the evening went. From house to house he went

until 11:00 pm when he returned home. No one had helped. The father said “Now

let's try a different experiment. Let's send you to my half friend who barely

knows you”.

As soon

as the half friend saw him covered with blood, he immediately grabbed him

inside and without waiting to hear what he had to say, he immediately stripped

off the clothes burned them, threw him in the bathtub, got rid of the knife,

and locked the front door and pocketed the key. The son then tried to explain

that now that he was cleaned up, he could go home, but the half friend said

“you aren't going anywhere tonight”. And so, the son was stuck there until the

morning. Then the “half-friend” took him by stealth to the fathers home and the

father explained what had really happened. The son knew then what a real friend

is.

·

In an

ideal world we would all be true friends like this (or like Jack and Rose, “If

you jump, I jump” -

Titanic, the movie

), however we don't live in that

ideal world. But we still should try to be the best friend we can, and value

our half-or quarter friends as long as that small percentage of friends in them

is real.

·

Someone

who has done you one favor is much more likely to do a you another than someone

you have done a favor for, since its already revealed they have the level of

giving flow in relation to your level. (That is in that subject they occupy a

higher plane and water flows from up to down).

One who

has reneged on a promise once will definitely do it again. One who has let you

down and shown him or herself to be untrustworthy once will do the same again

if given the chance.

Chapter 6 - Success

·

“Beware

of any activity that requires the purchase of new clothes,” [

Thoreau

] because

the clothes reflect the character and if the new activity involves different

clothes, then it's not for you.

Every

person was created with a certain Tzelem {form} {world line in time and space}

that he grows into. Therefore, any attempt to impose an external order on his

life will fail. He can make plans, put in much effort and try with all his

might, but if that order is not a part of his nature, and the nature of his

world-line, it won't be successful.

This is

what Socrates meant by know yourself. Most people waste years of their lives

and sometimes all of it trying to force some type of external order on

themselves that they have been taught is right for them but really isn't.

·

Christopher Morley said,

'There is only one success -- to be able to spend your life in your own way.

[quoted in the New York Post by Nelson and Dauten].

But even

so, happiness is having worthwhile goals and accomplishing them relative to

this.

CHARACTERISTICS OF LOSERS

1)

Interrupting work to answer the phone.

2)

Not learning a useful skill.

3)

Punishing friends and being nice to enemies.

4)

Bad manners, e.g., not thanking for gifts. —

Readers

Digest

5)

Dressing inappropriately

6)

Coming late for an appointment

CHARACTERISTICS OF WINNERS

1)

Maximizing the number of minimum (small

guaranteed) gains, as opposed to big non-guaranteed gains (as in Game Theory).

This is like Rabbi Nachman's way of learning quickly to gain as many small

points as possible as opposed to learning one part of the subject really well

but at the expense of getting the overview well. The Baal Hatanyah deals at

great length to resolve the conflict of which is more important; the overall

view [the name 52]; or the inner light of the specific details [the name 45].

2)

Taking a long time to get to the goal. Every

day for twenty years is a lot more than cramming it in six months and

forgetting. Thus, the idea of the Noam Elimelech: lessons every day to learn a

little bit Bible, a little bit halacha, a little bit of science, a little

Kabbalah, a little meditation. Over the course of many years, it adds up

·

When Pope

Julius II asked Michelangelo when the work on the Sistine Chapel would be done,

he answered, “When I shall have done all that I believe required to satisfy

art.” It occurs to me this is exactly the idea of James Cameron's obsession

with getting the Titanic a hundred percent right and not caring about

dead-lines or cost. “I made it a sacred goal of the production, a goal that

came to be shared by everyone involved, to honor the facts without compromise.”

·

People

tend to have some particular addiction which comes up in their conversation. -

i.e., a certain affixation on a certain body part, or idea, or event that they

continuously bring up. This is indicative of the nature of the outer light

surrounding that person or lack of it in certain places. These hang-ups are

what prevents a person from success.

·

The

difference between good and evil is that a good person gets pleasure out of

giving someone pleasure and an evil person gets pleasure from causing pain. It

really has little to do with who is receiving the good for the good, enjoy

giving pleasure even to evil people and the evil get pleasure from causing pain

even to their friend. Most people are between these two extremes and try to

benefit their friends, but this doesn't reflect their true character.

·

The

question of how to react to an enemy is the subject of debate in every

generation. The Sages of the Talmud say one who is kind in a place where

cruelty is needed, will eventually become cruel where kindness is needed. You

should pray for the good of your enemies but still guard yourself from them. I

think this idea would explain most of the statements of Jesus, the Bible, the

Besht, Buddha and the Sutras in this regard, so that there shouldn't be any

contradiction.

This is why I have written that the blessing in the eighteen

blessings cursing the non-believers should be skipped.

It seems

clear from the historical record that the Christians were originally considered

part of Judaism, and thus protected under Roman law and not obligated to

sacrifice to the image of the emperor. However, after much effort was spent

explaining to the Roman officials that the Christians were not a part of

Judaism, the persecutions began at the time of Judge Pilany and continued for

two hundred years. Now, to me it seems obvious who was the most anxious to

exclude the Christians from Judaism. In fact, there was a very rich agnostic

who wanted to exclude all references to the Jewish root of Jesus in the four

Gospels — and was told to take his money and leave. It seems the early church

wanted to preserve their Jewish roots. So, praying/cursing and hatred against

the Christians just seems to have backfired against us. Perhaps it's about time

to admit our mistake.

·

Saving

the world is not a noble occupation. It usually results in suffering, not help.

If the world has ever been made a better place, it’s by the self-searchers who

seek only to understand and correct themselves.

·

Just

because you get inspired by a place doesn't mean it’s any good. It may just be

the sparks of holiness that have fallen there and see you and attach themselves

to their root, i.e., your soul.

·

What

disturbs men’s minds is not events but their judgements on events.

­-

Epictetus

·

I have

heard from almost every enemy I ever had (by way of conversation with them

before they became my enemies), what their world view of people was — and it

always was the same -- they look at people friends or relatives as

assets

.

These

people make it their business to get as many friends as possible to further

their objectives. In retrospect, I can see why all these people ended up being

my sworn enemies. They discovered that I think too independently to be an asset

to anything or anyone. And it’s interesting to notice the world-view of all

those who remained my friend. Invariably, they look at people from an extremely

human point if view.

·

If

someone has betrayed you once, be sure that they will do it again if you give

them a chance. This can refer to parents or friends or anyone or a collective

community.

·

Life is

peace

with conflict.

·

By doing

kindness (many times) one suffers, but one should know that suffering would

have come upon him anyway, in a different form, except that by doing the

kindness the judgement is weakened.

Learning

heavy books which have to be done sitting down should be by making a pile of

them on one side of the desk and doing the amount necessary and transferring

them one by one to the opposite side of the desk. For lighter books one should

lie down and hold them over his head so the blood rushes to the head and

concentration is easier.

·

For

depression one has to go to the mikvah or a natural body of water and dip in

his whole body and play a musical instrument in order to draw the surrounding

light of

Binah

— Understanding.

·

Never

take yourself or what you are doing so seriously as to look down on others. It

is very important to give every person respect because God created them for His

reasons and has a place for everyone in His heart. Every person is born with a

certain Tzelem” or Form that he is born into. It isn't in his power to change

it. So, it isn't right to look down on anyone, even evil people. They may have

the ability to change but so do you and how easy is it for you to change your

character?

·

When

there are indications not to do something that one supposes is a mitzvah

sometimes the indication is to tell you that it is not a mitzvah. However, the

other times it is to tell you that it is an extremely important mitzvah. The

only way of telling is to go into your closet and meditate until hopefully you

get the right answer. The reason for this is that each person has a root soul

in Emanation, creation Formation or the physical universe. Since each of these

four worlds has varying degrees of evil the indications also will vary. Thus, a

person whose root soul is in Emanation will have all the indications pointing

in the correct direction. One whose root is in Creation will have the majority

pointing in the right direction. For Formation the majority is in the wrong

direction and for the physical person all the indications are in the wrong

direction-which causes them to remain physical and never to try to rise above

it. Those involved all day in physical activity are from the physical. Those

involved in learning are from Formation. Those involved in meditation and

prayer are from Creation and those whom the Light shines on the whole day are

from emanation. Sometimes a lot depends, however, on the place also since for

instance New York has only the light of Formation and the Physical. In some

places like Israel the light of Emanation shine but the light causes souls of

people not prepared for the light whose root souls aren't from emanation to

break and become evil. California has the light of Creation. Thus, Israel won't

be safe until collectively Jesus and Rabbi Nachman are accepted since then

there would be a connection for every person with emanation in the way that

wouldn't break their vessels.

Chapter 7 – Saints

·

The

reason one needs to be connected to a saint is that even with all the

preparation of virtue and study unless God shines his light on one then he

simply isn't connected with God [even though God is still connected with him by

the contracting light. And without that light one's spiritual life is simply

self-delusion. There is no such thing as spirituality except for that light.

[However, there are different levels of it so on the level of royalty or the

contraction God is still looking at one and he still must be careful in what he

says thinks and does. At any rate, because of this one must be connected with a

saint that is connected to the light. This is in fact one of the 613

commandments as it says in the Torah to be attached to God and the Sages ask

how is it possible to be attached to God? Isn't he a burning Fire? And they

answer to be attached to students of the wise men, i.e., do business with them

and to give to one of them your daughter.

However,

it is hard to know who is a saint. Rabbi Yaakov Abuchatzara gave the criteria

[in Maaglai Tzedek]. If you see two people serving God; one can do miracles and

the other can't, know that the one who can, is a greater saint that the other.

We see this in the Bible, for Eliyahu said to the head of the troop “If I am a

man of God let fire come down from Heaven...” Thus, we see that the proof of

his being a man of God was his ability to do a miracle. HE could have done the

miracle without saying “If I am a man of God”, but he added those words to

teach us this lesson. Also, the Bible teaches us how to discover if someone is

a true or false prophet. If they say any good thing will come to pass, and it

doesn't, or if he says to serve false gods or to stop keeping the commandments

then he is a false prophet.

This may

seem to contradict what I have said elsewhere about the importance of listening

to one's family and friends, not to rabbis. However, the answer to this is as

follows.

At any

there is a level of saint that applies to each individual in a spiritual way,

that is his parents and friends for though they may not be saints in terms of

the rest of the world they are in general   the level of “saint” in relation to

each individual. The test is if they have actually helped the individual in

some tangible physical way. If not, then they are just a lot of hot air. For

what they do for is on the level of a miracle, and by their love for you they

can have “Small Prophecy” to know the outcome of a course of action. This is

like what the Sages say that in naming ones child one has small prophecy.

Honor of

ones parents is in the Ten Commandments and honoring a rabbi is not even

mentioned in the Bible. Thus, even though the Sages tell us the importance of

honoring a true saint or sage this prescription has to be taken with a grain of

salt and in such a way that wouldn't contradict the open command of the Torah.

·

A good

way of really telling who is a saint is the test of time. For instance, the

writings of Moses are doing pretty good still after 3000 years. So are the

books of other saints. Modern-day so-called rabbis will be lucky if they are

remembered 20 years after they have passed except as some foot note in a

history book.

·

It's

impossible to know the answer to the criticism on any saint because of the

uncertainty principle -- the better you know the answer the less you are aware

of his being a saint. And the greater the saint is the less we can know the

answers to the questions on him.

·

The thing

that made Rabbi Israel Abuchatzera and all the great saints, wasn't so much

their prayer, fasting or learning, rather it was their tremendous desire to

help people. When that desire exists in one, God gives him the ability to help

people far beyond the rules of nature. The tools to help people are simple acts

of kindness, but for people like Rabbi Israel Abuchatzara it was possible to go

into the spiritual roots of the problem in the higher worlds and correct the

problem's there, and that would trickle down to this world where the problem would

disappear.

Yet even

a regular person can do that to some degree by prayer:

●

By going to the shrine of Rabbi Nachman for Rosh Hashanah; by

learning Kabbalah and science; by doing the unifications of Rabbi Luria

Ashkenazi

●

By prayer with the intentions of the Rashash

●

By doing the nullifying of judgments by the shrines of the saints

in Israel

●

By reading the whole Torah every verse forward and backwards and

then saying the Divine Names that come with the verse. (The simplest way is

saying the first letter of every word with the vowel under it as it is written

in the Torah, then the middle letters with the vowel which is specifically for

that letter, and then the last letter in the same way. (This method is good to

use with the

Lekutei Moharan

which also has the strength to nullify

judgments.

●

The most important thing to do is to bring loved ones together.

For in the next world loved ones are together. However, in this world usually

true mates are separated by time and place and even if they come together its

only for a brief time.

·

When one

denies a righteous person completely, he cuts off the flow of spiritual energy

which might have reached him. So those who may not know Jesus but don't deny

him may still receive the flow of the light of kindness from him.

·

When a

Tzadik is born there is born his evil side in another person. That's why he has

to pray for that person because it's really a part of himself, just he was

lucky that it was born elsewhere.

·

The way

God runs things changes so what one saint does to get some spiritual level will

not work nowadays unless that same spiritual flow is upon him. But private

prayer still works since it's the light of the crown which is the type of

Divine flow coming into the world. Learning Kabbalah is just on the level of

wisdom, so it doesn't work like it used to.

·

To reveal

the Divine traits, one needs an empty space. America, the land of freedom, is

between the East and West. And that's why America has grown, since it’s a land

of freedom and good deeds can only grow in a free environment. Chaos has its

own beautiful patterns and since in America there is some degree of freedom of

thought, ideas are able to flow around and sometimes to converge into a great

vortex, like the great red spot that is on Jupiter.

·

The

disagreement between the Talmud and Jesus is on the level of the argument

between the righteous. Jesus or the Talmud can't bring blessing unless they are

hidden by the argument on them.

·

Most

great saints don't have the right ideas -- just great hearts. Most great

geniuses don't have great hearts, just great heads. They have a common thread

and share many of the same characteristics but if we are to live according to

God's will, we can't listen to necessarily any one saint or any one genius if

we are to find a correct path in which God is accessible to common people. It

is necessary to listen to the wise and the saints of all ages especially those

that have withstood the test of time and to try to gain an idea of how their

teachings apply to us today (e.g., I don't think Mother Teresa necessarily had

a great head, but rather a great heart. She was a devout Catholic. Should we

all then become Catholics? I don't think so, and I don't think we'll all be

dammed if we don't, though that belief is part of the Catholic faith).

·

The

Rambam writes that making anything a mediator between you and God is idolatry

(just the same as serving anything besides God. So, apparently there should be

a problem doing any

mitzvah

which is supposed to bring you close to God

and bring blessing from God.

Now, the

idea that a mediator is against the Torah isn't accepted by all authorities.

So, to them there is no problem with the Gemarah saying that when you have

someone sick at home you should go to the Torah scholar to pray for you; nor

with the Gemarah about the saint who was having trouble with his neighbors and

went to the grave of his father asking for help; nor with the Gemarah saying

that if people would be able to go to the grave of Moses to pray, the

redemption would come right away.

But if we

go with the Rambam we would have to say that

mitzvot

and

tzadikim

are

included in the 10

sephirot

of Emanation and thus are considered one

with God. I would say the Rambam avoided all this by saying “making a creation

a mediator”. Also, when you do the mitzvot, those are the things God said to do

to come close to Him and receive his blessing, so they are serving God, and in

a way the mediators that God has specified for his service. This would include

being “attached and united” to a Tzadik which is one of the 613 commandments.

·

The

difference between the Rambam and the other authorities is that if one holds

that a Tzadik is a sephirah of Emanation then to the Rambam it would be

forbidden to ask him to pray for you, but if you hold like the other

authorities, it would be permitted.

·

The idea

of combining the paths of the righteous is from Zushia the brother of the Rabbi

Elimelech of Lezinsk. He, however only used the idea for the chasidishe

saints... I have gone out on a limb to take it further to combine all saints.

If this is correct it is a tremendous truth. If not, I will be dammed forever

by the view point of any religion. [Reb Zushia got it from the verse, “for God

knows the path of the saints”, “knows” has a double meaning, of putting

together. So, Reb Zushia derived the idea that God puts together the diverging

paths of the saints. This was in relation to the Chasidishe saints who all had

completely different paths. One was into prayer, another into good deeds,

another into learning and so on.

·

Jesus

contains the vessels of Tohu [chaos] and thus majors in physical healing, and

in bringing people to the Garden of Eden in the next world; which is also so to

speak relevant to the vessels of the light, which are people's souls, and the

actual surroundings of those souls in the next world. Rabbi Nachman has to do

with more with the drawing of the infinite light of the crown, or of wisdom its

vessel. He has very little to do with healing anybody or miracles in general.

·

We are

indebted to the Hindu thinkers [Shankara and Ramanuja] for the emphasis and

clarity of their belief that the God is the only reality. This belief

eventually got into Judaism, where it was all the time (but submerged), until

the Baal Shem Tov brought it to the surface and the Litvaks were forced to

concede to its truth - however reluctantly that may have been. Yet the

pessimism of Hindu and Buddhist teachings (i.e., their idea that human deeds

are fruitless and have no essential value) stifled their civilization for 2000

years while the Jewish belief in the power of the mind [the father] and the

Christian belief in the power of good deeds [the mother church] shaped and

brought forth western civilization. Here we have another example of the

importance of Reb Zushia's idea of combining the paths of all the saints

·

How to

Tell if Someone is a Saint

Rabbi

Yakov Abuchatzeira writes in Maaglei Zedek, that if you see two people serving

God, but one if full of miracles and the other is not, you should know the

reason is because the one with the miracles is a greater saint than the other

even though you don't know why. As Eliyahu the Prophet said, “if I am a man of

God let fire come down from heaven.” He made the test of his righteousness

dependent on a miracle. This test would leave all present-day rabbis out in the

cold.

·

The

reason some psychic people or even saints lack certain knowledge is that part

of their soul is missing. Some saint/psychics can advise on everything until it

comes to a monetary issue, where their love for it blinds them. Also, in a more

general way this explains why only one Jewish saint saw the truth about Jesus

even though there were many other saints before and after him. This also

explains how Rabbi Akiva could decide that Bar Kochba was the Messiah - the

Messiah frequency was missing in his radio.

·

It was

revealed to the Baal Shem Tov that he came to his high level not so much from

the learning of the Talmud as from the Mikvah. The Noam Elimelech said: Moses

came to his level by doing unifications every day immediately (in the morning)

when he woke up. [The Ari said Moses and Binyahu ben Yehodaya both did that

type of service.] Rabbi Nachman said the main thing is “hisbodedut”, private

conversation with God.

These are

three types of Divine service that three saints said could bring a person to a

high spiritual level. I wonder if these maybe are the “three types of service”

that the Messiah revealed to the Baal Shem Tov that if any person would do them

along with three specific unifications, they would be able to “make

unifications and rise to the higher worlds like you.”

The Baal

Shem Tov had to swear not to reveal them, but it would make sense to say that

he himself did them. Though he did many types of service we know the

mikvah

was a major factor. For other things he did, we would only be guessing if they

help. Anyone could suggest a bunch of things that happened to appeal to them,

like learning

Gemara

, learning

Zohar

, fasting,

davening

early at sunrise, saying the midnight prayer, this would all be speculation.

But on those three things [Meditation on God's Divine names, private prayer,

mikvah] we have the testimony of three saints that they work.

·

Rabbi

Nachman is the level of Messiah of David who combines Royalty with Beauty and

whose higher root is the Crown. Jesus is on the level of Messiah of Joseph

whose root is Foundation and whose higher root is Wisdom. One needs both - as

one sephirah by itself produces no energy. Only when they revolve around each

other are useful fruits produced

·

The way

of telling if a person is a saint is if you feel good around them. This is

because holiness permeates the area surrounding a saint.

·

There are

two kinds of saints: the hidden and the visible. The hidden saint is

accelerating towards God and thus is invisible to inertial observers some or

all the time. The world-line of this saint is a hyperbola (which is the root of

the letter Kaph), which stands for the crown, for this saint is on the level of

the crown. [This is due to the fact that an event horizon can result from

acceleration, not just a gravitational field.]